‎I was serving at the Austria branch
‎from about the mid-1970’s to 1990.
‎We had a small department
‎that was assigned
‎to help certain countries in Eastern Europe.
‎And that included
‎visiting the brothers under ban,
‎bringing them spiritual food,
‎having secret meetings with them,
‎and also strengthening
‎the local organization
‎that was exposed
‎to persecution and ban.
‎We would print books on Bible paper
‎in miniature size.
‎This way, more books or literature
‎could be taken to these countries.
‎The couriers transported literature
‎to these countries
‎in their own private cars.
‎This way,
‎hundreds of books could be transported.
‎At the border, if a courier
‎would be found transporting literature,
‎they would interrogate the driver.
‎But these brothers were trained;
‎they knew what to say
‎to protect the work
‎and to not give away any secrets.
‎Usually, after a day or two days,
‎the officials would let them go back home
‎to their home country
‎but not with their car;
‎they had to use public transportation
‎because their cars would be confiscated.
‎But the brothers had the spirit of sacrifice;
‎they were willing to risk that.
‎But the majority got through,
‎and actually every year,
‎thousands of miniature books
‎were transported secretly
‎to Eastern Europe.
‎So it was not just a matter
‎of us being so clever in hiding things
‎and getting it to the brothers,
‎but we were always fully convinced
‎and had evidence
‎that it was Jehovah’s holy spirit
‎that helped us.
‎Also, we transported stencils
‎for local production
‎so that in their countries
‎they could reproduce the same material
‎with mimeographing machines.
‎In most cases,
‎the mimeographing machines
‎were transported secretly
‎by the couriers.
‎The other method
‎was to build it within the country.
‎I remember that there was a brother
‎who was a very skilled engineer,
‎and under his direction,
‎they decided to build it themselves.
‎So there were self-made
‎offset printing presses.
‎The brothers had a number
‎of underground printeries
‎that they had dug out
‎under their own homes.
‎In many cases, the brothers had to do
‎what they did during the night
‎because in Communist countries,
‎they had to go during the day
‎to a factory or whatever else
‎and do some secular work.
‎But it testifies to the great spirit
‎of sacrifice that the brothers showed
‎—to forfeit so much
‎of their private life as a family
‎to do at night the printing
‎of the spiritual food.
‎Some had only a few hours of sleep,
‎but they loved Jehovah
‎and the brothers so much
‎that they did it.
‎There was no Kingdom Hall.
‎The brothers
‎had secret meetings in private homes,
‎and they would not all come
‎at the same time
‎because if the neighbors
‎would see certain persons
‎all the time going to a specific house,
‎there could be suspicions.
‎And every week, they had the meetings
‎in a different home of the brothers.
‎And this helped to protect the work
‎so that it could be kept secret.
‎Singing was very important
‎for the brothers,
‎and they didn’t have to have
‎a songbook in hand.
‎They knew the text of the song by heart,
‎and immediately after saying a number,
‎they could sing the song.
‎That affected the heart
‎—the emotions of the brothers—
‎so they were strengthened
‎in their determination to be faithful.
‎A lot of pressure
‎was on the brothers in Romania.
‎The Communist Party tried
‎to sow distrust among the brothers,
‎meeting with them separately
‎and telling some brothers one thing
‎and telling other brothers something else.
‎Sometimes it happened
‎that an official posed
‎as an interested person
‎and was clever enough to disguise that
‎and pretend
‎to make progress in the truth
‎—not only to the point
‎of getting baptized
‎but even to the point
‎of becoming an elder.
‎But he was in reality an agent
‎of the secret police
‎with an aim to find out everything
‎about the organization.
‎So it did lead to, in one case,
‎the brothers starting to distrust someone
‎that was actually appointed by headquarters.
‎And these brothers then separated
‎from the organization that Jehovah used,
‎and some of them were separated
‎for not just a few years but for decades.
‎And they were a large number,
‎up to 5,000 publishers.
‎They continued to meet together.
‎They were preaching and using material
‎that they had left over from earlier years,
‎but they hardly got
‎any new material to study
‎because they were not in touch
‎with the organization
‎that was used by headquarters.
‎Attempts to bring the brothers back
‎into the organization
‎were made from time to time,
‎but it seemed that the brothers
‎from the separated organization
‎did not have sufficient trust.
‎But when we presented
‎to the leader of the separated group
‎that one
‎from the Governing Body would come,
‎he was happy about that
‎and he had enough trust in that case
‎to agree that we should have a meeting
‎and seriously talk about reunification.
‎And so from the separated group,
‎there were Brother Albu,
‎who was the leader,
‎and four of his main elders.
‎And from our side,
‎there was Brother Jaracz,
‎our translator,
‎and I was part of that group.
‎Also, there were several
‎from the Country Committee of Romania.
‎I remember that the first night
‎there were a lot of accusations
‎about what the others
‎had done or not done,
‎which did not create the best spirit,
‎and we mainly listened.
‎But everybody agreed
‎to meet another night.
‎And the second night,
‎Jehovah obviously wanted
‎the brothers to unite again
‎because the whole spirit was different,
‎and the brothers talked the matters over
‎and clarified some misunderstandings.
‎And at the end of the second evening,
‎I remember that the leader
‎of the separated group,
‎Brother Albu, said,
‎‘Let’s do it because if we don’t do it now,
‎we may never have
‎another opportunity again.’
‎And so the decision was made.
‎That doesn’t happen every day
‎that 5,000 brothers
‎come back to the organization.
‎From then on, all the practical things
‎were put in place
‎to accomplish this reunification.
‎They were asked to merge
‎with our congregations.
‎And that also took a lot of humility
‎on their part,
‎but they were willing to do it.
‎So they were really brothers
‎in their heart and loved the truth.
‎And so the reunification was accomplished,
‎and that was a wonderful victory
‎for Jehovah and against Satan.
‎Reflecting on the experience
‎with the brothers in Romania,
‎we can see that there could always be
‎misunderstandings among humans
‎and there could always be
‎even legitimate complaints
‎about the misconduct
‎of some responsible brothers.
‎But the important thing
‎is never to lose trust
‎that this is Jehovah’s organization.
‎That’s where Jehovah’s blessing is.
‎Jehovah sees it all.
‎Jehovah uses his holy spirit
‎to keep the organization together,
‎and what he wants
‎to have accomplished will happen.
‎If we work with the holy spirit,
‎then Jehovah will bless our efforts
‎and it will be successful to his praise.